[METADATA: STANDARD_ID = IS 546]

IS 5465 : 2013

(Reaffirmed 2019)

TRAA MAF
Geren oa — aR
(TEM FRAT)
Indian Standard

SONALI BARK — SPECIFICATION

( First Revision )

ICS 59.140.10

© BIS 2013

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG
NEW DELHI 110002

October 2012 Price Group 2

Leather, Tanning Materials and Allied Products Sectional Committee, CHD 17

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by
the Leather, Tanning Materials and Allied Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical
Division Council.

SONALI or SONARI (Cassia fistula Linn.) is a moderate sized deciduous tree with a rather open crown, found in
deciduous forests throughout the greater part of India (ascending to 1 200 m in the Himalayas), Myanmar and
Sri Lanka. Sonali being a deciduous tree is never found along with ever green species, but confined to deciduous
forest only. The tree is one of the most beautiful flowering trees of India. The vernacular names are AMALTAS
(Hindi), SONALI (Bengali),

SANARU (Assam), SONALU (Nepali), SONARI (Oriya), BAHAWA (Marathi), KAKKE (Kanarese), KONNAI or
KONNAM (Tamil), and RELA (Telugu). The bark is about 0.65 cm thick in younger trees, smooth, light grey of
reddish brown exfoliating in hard scales.

The SONALI bark may be used alone or in conjunction with BABUL [Acacia nilotica (Linn.) Del], GORAN
[Ceriops decandra (Griff) Ding Hon-Syn. Ceriops roxburghiana Arn., fam. Rhizophoraceae], Myrobalans
(Terminulia chebula Retz.) and other types of tannins. The bark is highly astringent and belongs to the condensed
(catechol) type of tannin. Due to its lighter colouring properties, this may be used for the manufacture of upholstery
and light coloured lining leathers. The leather produced with SONALI bark possesses smooth grain, very pale
almost white colour. However, since the penetration power of this bark infusions is comparatively low, it is often
used as a blend with other barks, like BABUL and AVARAM. Further, on account of its low tan-content and lower
tan-nontan ratio, it is not economical for extract manufacture as such but extract can profitably be manufactured
when blended with GORAN or AVARAM.

This standard was originally published in 1969. In this revision, the requirement on pentachlorophenol (PCP) has
been introduced keeping in view of the demand for eco-friendly inputs from the leather industry.

The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B.

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value,
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 5465 : 2013

Indian Standard
SONALI BARK — SPECIFICATION

( First Revision )

1 SCOPE

This standard prescribes the requirements and the
methods of sampling and test for SONALI bark
intended for tanning and for the use in the manufacture
of blended tanning extract.

2 REFERENCES

The standards listed below contain provisions which,
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to
revision and parties to agreements based on this
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility
of applying the most recent editions of the standards
indicated below.

IS No. Title

1640 : 2007 Glossary of terms relating to hides,

skins and leather (first revision)

5466 : 1969 Methods of test for vegetable tanning
materials
3 TERMINOLOGY

For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given
in IS 1640 shall apply.

4 REQUIREMENTS

4.1 Material

The material shall be the bark of SONALI tree, Cassia
fistula Linn., properly collected and dried in shade.

4.2 The material shall also comply with the
requirements given in Table 1, when tested according
to the methods given in col 4 of Table 1.

5 PACKING AND MARKING

5.1 Packing

Unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser and
the supplier the SONALI bark shall be packed in fairly
light-proof containers like gunny bags.

5.2 Marking

Packages shall be marked on the outside with the
following information:

a) Name of the material;
b) Net mass of the material;

c) Supplier’s name or recognized trade-mark, if
any; and
d) Date of packing.

5.2.1 BIS Certification Marking

The containers may also be marked with the Standard
Mark.

5.2.1.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by
the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standard Act,
1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder.
The details of conditions under which the licence for
the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the
Bureau of Indian Standards.

Table 1 Requirements for SONALI Bark
Characteristic Requirement

(Clause 4.2)
Sl Characteristic Require- Method of Test,
No. ment Ref to Cl of
IS 5466
(1) (2) (3) (4)
i) Moisture, percent by mass, Max 15 6
ii) Non-tans’, percent by mass, Max 13 9
iii) Tannins”, percent by mass, Min 12 10
iv) pH of analytical strength 4.5 12
solution, Min
v) Colour: 13
a) Red, Max 5 —
b) Yellow/red, Min 2 —
vi) PCP content”, mg/kg, Max 5 16

D Calculated on moisture-free basis.

6 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR
CONFORMITY

6.1 Representative samples of the material shall be
drawn in accordance with Annex A and their
conformity to the requirements of this standard shall
be judged as follows.

6.2 Number of Tests

Each test sample in the set shall be tested individually
for all the requirements of this standard.

6.3 Criterion for Conformity

The lot shall be declared to conform to the requirements
of this standard if each test sample in the set passes all
the tests.

IS 5465 : 2013

ANNEX A
(Clause 6.1)

SAMPLING OF SONALI BARK

A-1 SCALE OF SAMPLING

A-1.1 Lot

In a single consignment all the SONALI bark of the
same form of cutting, collected and dried under similar
conditions, shall constitute one lot.

A-1.2 For ascertaining the conformity of the material
to the requirements of this standard, each lot shall be
considered separately. The number of packages to be
selected for this purpose shall depend on the size of
the lot and shall be in accordance with Table 2.

A-1.3 The packages shall be selected at random from
the lot. To ensure randomness of selection, random
number tables (see IS 4905) shall be used. In case,
random number tables are not available, the following
procedure may be adopted:

Starting from any package, count all the packages
in the lot as 1, 2, 3,....... etc, up to r and so on
where r is the integral part of N/n where N is the
number of packages in the lot and n the number to
be sampled. Every rth container thus counted shall
be withdrawn to constitute the sample.

A-2 PREPARATION OF SAMPLES

A-2.1 From each of the packages selected according
to A-1.2 small portions of the material shall be taken
from different parts so as to obtain a most representative
sample of the package. The total quantity of the
material taken from a package shall be at least three
times the quantity needed for carrying out all the tests.

Table 2 Number of Packages to be Sampled
Number of Packages in the Lot
(Clause A-1.2)

Sl No. of Packages No. of Packages
No. in the Lot to be Sampled
a) (2) (3)
i) Up to 25 3
ii) 26 to 50 4
iii) 51 to 150 5
iv) 151 to 300 6
v) 301 to 500 T
vi) 501 to 1 000 8
vii) 1 001 and above 9

A-2.2 The material obtained from each package
in A-2.1 shall be divided into three equal parts each
forming a test sample representing the package. One
set of these samples, each representing a selected
package shall be marked for the purchaser, another for
the supplier and the third set kept as a referee sample.

A-2.3 All the test samples shall be immediately
transferred to separate sample containers and shall be
sealed air-tight and marked with full particulars
necessary for proper identification, such as name of
the supplier, place and date of packing, year of
production, lot number, date of sampling, name of
sampler, etc.

A-2.4 The referee sample consisting of a set of test
samples shall bear the seal of both the supplier and the
purchaser and shall be kept at a place till such time
and under conditions agreed to between the two for
use in case of disputes.

IS 5465 : 2013

ANNEX B
(Foreword)
